paper_population/README.md, before:

# FMLLMSolver: Barrier Certificate Generation using LLMs

**FMLLMSolver** explores the use of Large Language Models (LLMs), enhanced by Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) and fine-tuning, to assist in or automate the generation of **barrier certificates** for autonomous systems. The core idea is to leverage a knowledge base built from relevant research papers to improve the LLM's ability to propose valid barrier functions for given system dynamics.

---

## Table of Contents

*   [Overview](#overview)
*   [Project Structure](#project-structure)
*   [Setup](#setup)
    *   [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
    *   [Installation](#installation)
*   [Workflow / Usage](#workflow--usage)
    *   [1. Data Fetching](#1-data-fetching)
    *   [2. Build Knowledge Base](#2-build-knowledge-base)
    *   [3. Test Knowledge Base (Optional)](#3-test-knowledge-base-optional)
    *   [4. Create/Prepare Fine-tuning Data](#4-createprepare-fine-tuning-data)
    *   [5. Run an Initial Training Test (Optional)](#5-run-an-initial-training-test-optional)
    *   [6. Fine-tune the LLM (Full)](#6-fine-tune-the-llm-full)
    *   [7. Generate Certificate (Inference)](#7-generate-certificate-inference)
    *   [8. Evaluate the Pipeline](#8-evaluate-the-pipeline)
*   [Configuration](#configuration)
*   [Verification Limitations](#verification-limitations)
*   [Author / Context](#author--context)
*   [Future Work / Enhancements](#future-work--enhancements)

---

## Overview

This project implements a pipeline consisting of several distinct phases:

1.  **Data Fetching:** Acquiring relevant research papers (PDFs).
2.  **Knowledge Base Construction:** Processing papers (including OCR) into a searchable vector database (FAISS index + metadata) for RAG.
3.  **Fine-tuning:** Specializing an LLM (using QLoRA for efficiency) on examples of system dynamics and corresponding barrier certificates.
4.  **Inference:** Combining the knowledge base (RAG) and the fine-tuned LLM to generate barrier certificate candidates for new systems.
5.  **Evaluation:** Assessing the validity and quality of the generated certificates using basic symbolic checks (`sympy`) **and numerical sampling** (`numpy`, `scipy`) against a benchmark dataset.

---

## Project Structure

The project is organized into modules based on functionality:

```
paper_population/
|
├── data_fetching/              # Scripts for downloading papers
│   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── paper_fetcher.py        # Main script to fetch papers
│   └── user_ids.csv            # Example author IDs (optional input)
|
├── knowledge_base/             # Scripts & data for the RAG knowledge base
│   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── knowledge_base_builder.py # Script to build vector index & metadata
│   ├── test_knowledge_base.py    # Script to test KB retrieval
│   └── knowledge_base_enhanced/  # Default output dir for KB data
│       ├── paper_index_enhanced.faiss
│       └── paper_metadata_enhanced.json
|
├── fine_tuning/                # Scripts & data for fine-tuning the LLM
│   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── create_finetuning_data.py # Interactive script for manual data creation
│   ├── finetune_llm.py         # Script to run QLoRA fine-tuning
│   ├── generate_synthetic_data.py # Generates simple synthetic examples
│   ├── extract_from_papers.py  # Generates prompts for LLM-based extraction
│   └── combine_datasets.py     # Utility to merge datasets
│   # *.jsonl files are example outputs/inputs for datasets
|
├── inference/                  # Scripts for running inference
│   ├── __init__.py
│   └── generate_certificate.py # Generates certificate using RAG + Fine-tuned LLM
|
├── evaluation/                 # Scripts & data for pipeline evaluation
│   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── benchmark_systems.json    # Sample benchmark systems (incl. sampling bounds)
│   ├── evaluate_pipeline.py    # Main script to run evaluation
│   ├── verify_certificate.py     # Script for symbolic & numerical checks (basic)
│   └── evaluation_results.csv    # (Output) Example evaluation results
|
├── recent_papers_all_sources_v2/ # Default output directory for fetched papers
|
├── results_barrier_certs/        # Default output directory for fine-tuning results
│   └── final_adapter/            # Saved LoRA adapter weights
|
├── install.sh                  # Original install script (review needed)
├── requirements.txt            # Python package dependencies
└── README.md                   # This file
```

---

## Setup

### Prerequisites

*   **Python:** >= 3.8 recommended.
*   **Git:** For cloning the repository.
*   **Tesseract OCR Engine:** Required by `pytesseract` for OCR in Phase 2.
    *   *Debian/Ubuntu:* `sudo apt update && sudo apt install tesseract-ocr`
    *   *macOS:* `brew install tesseract`
    *   *Windows:* Download installer from [Tesseract at UB Mannheim](https://github.com/UB-Mannheim/tesseract/wiki) or build from source.
*   **CUDA Toolkit:** Required for GPU acceleration (fine-tuning, inference). Ensure compatibility with `torch` and `bitsandbytes` versions in `requirements.txt`. Check NVIDIA's documentation for installation.

### Installation

1.  **Clone:**
    ```bash
    # Replace with your repository URL
    git clone https://your-repository-url/FMLLMSolver.git
    cd FMLLMSolver/paper_population
    ```

2.  **Create Environment (Recommended):**
    ```bash
    python -m venv venv
    source venv/bin/activate  # Linux/macOS
    # venv\Scripts\activate  # Windows (cmd/powershell)
    ```

3.  **Install Dependencies:**
    ```bash
    pip install -r requirements.txt
    ```

4.  **Download SpaCy Model:**
    ```bash
    python -m spacy download en_core_web_sm
    ```

---

## Workflow / Usage

Execute the steps in the following order. Ensure you are in the `FMLLMSolver/paper_population` directory.

### 1. Data Fetching

*   **(Optional)** Modify `data_fetching/user_ids.csv` if needed.
*   Run the script:
    ```bash
    python data_fetching/paper_fetcher.py
    ```
*   Downloads PDFs to `recent_papers_all_sources_v2/` (by default).

### 2. Build Knowledge Base

*   Processes downloaded PDFs, performs OCR, chunks, embeds, and indexes the text.
    ```bash
    python knowledge_base/knowledge_base_builder.py
    ```
*   Creates the index (`.faiss`) and metadata (`.json`) in `knowledge_base/knowledge_base_enhanced/`.

### 3. Test Knowledge Base (Optional)

*   Perform a quick check on the knowledge base retrieval.
    ```bash
    python knowledge_base/test_knowledge_base.py "What is a barrier certificate?" -k 3
    ```

### 4. Create/Prepare Fine-tuning Data

This is the most critical step for model performance. Choose one or more methods:

*   **Option A: Manual Creation** (Requires domain expertise, Recommended for high quality)
    ```bash
    python fine_tuning/create_finetuning_data.py --output_file fine_tuning/manual_data.jsonl
    ```
    Follow prompts to enter verified (System, Certificate) pairs.
*   **Option B: Synthetic Generation** (Good for basic examples, limited scope)
    ```bash
    python fine_tuning/generate_synthetic_data.py --output_file fine_tuning/synthetic_data.jsonl
    ```
*   **Option C: LLM-Assisted Extraction** (Requires powerful external LLM + **Mandatory Manual Review**)
    1.  `python fine_tuning/extract_from_papers.py --output_instructions_file prompts_to_run.txt`
    2.  Manually run prompts from `prompts_to_run.txt` with an external LLM (e.g., GPT-4, Claude 3).
    3.  **CRITICALLY REVIEW** LLM outputs for correctness against source papers.
    4.  Save **verified** JSON objects (one per line) to `fine_tuning/extracted_data_verified.jsonl`.
*   **Combine Datasets:** Merge desired sources into a final training file. The `combine_datasets.py` script attempts to read `metadata.source` or infer source from filenames.
    ```bash
    # Example: Combine manual, synthetic, and verified extracted data
    python fine_tuning/combine_datasets.py \\\
        fine_tuning/manual_data.jsonl \\\
        fine_tuning/synthetic_data.jsonl \\\
        fine_tuning/extracted_data_verified.jsonl \\\
        --output_file fine_tuning/finetuning_data_combined.jsonl

    # Example: Create dataset with only synthetic data
    # python fine_tuning/combine_datasets.py fine_tuning/synthetic_data.jsonl --output_file fine_tuning/finetuning_data_synthetic_only.jsonl
    ```

### 5. Run an Initial Training Test (Optional)

This section guides you through performing a minimal run of the fine-tuning pipeline using only synthetic data to ensure the scripts execute correctly. **Note:** This is likely insufficient for producing an effective model.

*   **Prerequisites:** Ensure steps 1 and 2 (Fetching, Building KB) are done. Ensure [Setup](#setup) is complete.
*   **Generate Synthetic Data:**
    ```bash
    python fine_tuning/generate_synthetic_data.py --output_file fine_tuning/synthetic_data.jsonl
    ```
*   **Prepare Synthetic-Only Dataset for Trainer:**
    ```bash
    python fine_tuning/combine_datasets.py \\\
        fine_tuning/synthetic_data.jsonl \\\
        --output_file fine_tuning/finetuning_data_initial_test.jsonl \\\
    ```
*   **Run Fine-tuning (Requires GPU):**
    ```bash
    python fine_tuning/finetune_llm.py \\\
        --data_path fine_tuning/finetuning_data_initial_test.jsonl \\\
        --output_dir ./results_initial_test \\\
        --num_train_epochs 1 # Keep epochs low for initial test
    ```
*   Monitor output. If successful, adapter weights appear in `./results_initial_test/final_adapter`.

### 6. Fine-tune the LLM (Full)

*   ⚠️ **Requires a CUDA-enabled GPU with sufficient VRAM** (e.g., >16GB for 7B/8B models with QLoRA).
*   Execute the fine-tuning script, pointing to your **high-quality combined dataset** created in step 4.
    ```bash
    python fine_tuning/finetune_llm.py \\\
        --data_path fine_tuning/finetuning_data_combined.jsonl \\\
        --output_dir ./results_full_run1 \\\
        --num_train_epochs 3 # Adjust as needed
    ```
*   Saves the LoRA adapter weights to the specified output directory (e.g., `./results_full_run1/final_adapter`).

### 7. Generate Certificate (Inference)

*   Uses the RAG pipeline with the fine-tuned adapter to propose a certificate.
    ```bash
    python inference/generate_certificate.py \\\
      "System Dynamics: dx/dt = -x**3 - y, dy/dt = x - y**3. Initial Set: x**2+y**2 <= 0.1. Unsafe Set: x >= 1.5" \\\
      --adapter ./results_full_run1/final_adapter # Use adapter from full run
    ```
*   Replace the system description text. Ensure the `--adapter` path is correct.

### 8. Evaluate the Pipeline

*   **Populate Benchmark:** Add diverse systems to `evaluation/benchmark_systems.json`. **Ensure `sampling_bounds` are defined** for each system.
*   Run the full evaluation pipeline using your trained adapter:
    ```bash
    python evaluation/evaluate_pipeline.py \\\
      --adapter ./results_full_run1/final_adapter \\\
      --benchmark evaluation/benchmark_systems.json \\\
      --results evaluation/evaluation_full_run1.csv
    ```
*   This script runs generation, attempts parsing, performs symbolic **and numerical** verification, and saves results.

---

## Configuration

Default paths, model names, and hyperparameters are set as constants near the top of each relevant Python script. Many of these can be overridden using command-line arguments.

Run scripts with `-h` or `--help` to see available arguments, for example:

```bash
python fine_tuning/finetune_llm.py --help
python evaluation/evaluate_pipeline.py --help
```

---

## Verification Limitations

⚠️ **The current verification (`evaluation/verify_certificate.py`) provides basic symbolic checks and more extensive numerical sampling checks, but it is NOT sufficient for formal safety guarantees.**

*   **Symbolic Checks:** Uses `sympy` to calculate the Lie derivative (\(\dot{B}\)). Checks if \(\dot{B}\) is identically zero, but other symbolic checks for \(\dot{B} \le 0\) are heuristic and limited.
*   **Numerical Checks:** Uses `numpy` and `scipy` (via `sympy.lambdify`) to sample points within specified `sampling_bounds`.
    *   Checks if \(\dot{B}(x) \le \epsilon\) for samples within the safe set.
    *   Checks boundary conditions (e.g., \(B(x) \le \epsilon\) in initial set, \(B(x) \ge -\epsilon\) outside unsafe set) on samples.
    *   **Provides empirical evidence but not formal proof.** A counterexample might be missed.
    *   Set membership checks currently use `eval` on condition strings, which requires trusted input in the benchmark file.
*   **Boundary Conditions:** Formal verification of boundary conditions remains challenging, especially symbolically.

For reliable verification, especially for publication or deployment, integration with more advanced methods like **Sum-of-Squares (SOS) programming** (for polynomial systems) or **robust optimization-based falsification** is necessary.

---

## Author / Context

This project was developed by **Patrick Cooper** as part of graduate work at the **University of Colorado Boulder (CU Boulder)**.

---

## Future Work / Enhancements

*   **PDF Parsing:** Integrate GROBID (structure) or MathPix API (equations) into `knowledge_base_builder.py`.
*   **Fine-tuning Data:** Explore semi-automated methods for extracting (System, Certificate) pairs.
*   **Robust Verification:** Implement optimization-based falsification or interface with SOS solvers in `verify_certificate.py`. Replace `eval`-based set checks with safer parsing.
*   **LLM Output Parsing:** Improve the robustness of `extract_certificate_from_llm_output`.
*   **Experimentation:** Test different base LLMs, embedding models, vector databases, and fine-tuning strategies.
*   **UI:** Develop a simple graphical or web interface.

Commit message:

Added formal description for readme

paper_population/README.md, after:

# FMLLMSolver: Barrier Certificate Generation using LLMs

**FMLLMSolver** explores the use of Large Language Models (LLMs), enhanced by Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) and fine-tuning, to assist in or automate the generation of **barrier certificates** for autonomous systems. The core idea is to leverage a knowledge base built from relevant research papers to improve the LLM's ability to propose valid barrier functions for given system dynamics.

---

## Table of Contents

*   [Overview](#overview)
*   [Project Structure](#project-structure)
*   [Setup](#setup)
    *   [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
    *   [Installation](#installation)
*   [Workflow / Usage](#workflow--usage)
    *   [1. Data Fetching](#1-data-fetching)
    *   [2. Build Knowledge Base](#2-build-knowledge-base)
    *   [3. Test Knowledge Base (Optional)](#3-test-knowledge-base-optional)
    *   [4. Create/Prepare Fine-tuning Data](#4-createprepare-fine-tuning-data)
    *   [5. Run an Initial Training Test (Optional)](#5-run-an-initial-training-test-optional)
    *   [6. Fine-tune the LLM (Full)](#6-fine-tune-the-llm-full)
    *   [7. Generate Certificate (Inference)](#7-generate-certificate-inference)
    *   [8. Evaluate the Pipeline](#8-evaluate-the-pipeline)
*   [Configuration](#configuration)
*   [Verification Limitations](#verification-limitations)
*   [Author / Context](#author--context)
*   [Future Work / Enhancements](#future-work--enhancements)

---

## Overview

Formal verification provides essential safety and correctness guarantees for complex autonomous systems, with techniques like barrier certificates offering powerful tools for proving set invariance and reach-avoid properties. However, the synthesis of suitable barrier functions remains a significant bottleneck, often demanding considerable domain expertise or relying on computationally intensive methods like Sum-of-Squares (SOS) programming, which can struggle with non-polynomial dynamics or high dimensionality. This project investigates the potential of Large Language Models (LLMs) to address the *candidate generation* challenge within the barrier certificate synthesis workflow.

We propose leveraging LLMs, augmented by domain knowledge extracted from a curated corpus of relevant research literature via Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG), to propose plausible barrier certificate candidates for given system dynamics. The core idea is to fine-tune an LLM specifically on the task of mapping system descriptions (dynamics, initial/unsafe sets) to potential barrier function structures, learning heuristics and patterns from existing published examples. The goal is not to supplant rigorous verification but to accelerate the overall process by providing formally-inclined researchers with high-quality, structured hypotheses for barrier functions, thereby narrowing the search space for subsequent analysis.

The implemented pipeline includes modules for automated paper fetching, knowledge base construction using text embedding and vector indexing (FAISS), efficient LLM fine-tuning (QLoRA), and an inference engine combining RAG with the specialized model. Crucially, the evaluation module incorporates symbolic differentiation (`sympy`) for Lie derivative calculation and numerical sampling checks for basic validation of proposed certificates. While this preliminary verification helps filter candidates, the framework explicitly acknowledges the need for integration with established formal methods tools (e.g., SOS solvers, theorem provers, robust numerical verification techniques) to provide the necessary soundness guarantees for the generated barrier certificates before they can be formally certified.

---

## Project Structure

The project is organized into modules based on functionality:

```
paper_population/
|
├── data_fetching/              # Scripts for downloading papers
│   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── paper_fetcher.py        # Main script to fetch papers
│   └── user_ids.csv            # Example author IDs (optional input)
|
├── knowledge_base/             # Scripts & data for the RAG knowledge base
│   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── knowledge_base_builder.py # Script to build vector index & metadata
│   ├── test_knowledge_base.py    # Script to test KB retrieval
│   └── knowledge_base_enhanced/  # Default output dir for KB data
│       ├── paper_index_enhanced.faiss
│       └── paper_metadata_enhanced.json
|
├── fine_tuning/                # Scripts & data for fine-tuning the LLM
│   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── create_finetuning_data.py # Interactive script for manual data creation
│   ├── finetune_llm.py         # Script to run QLoRA fine-tuning
│   ├── generate_synthetic_data.py # Generates simple synthetic examples
│   ├── extract_from_papers.py  # Generates prompts for LLM-based extraction
│   └── combine_datasets.py     # Utility to merge datasets
│   # *.jsonl files are example outputs/inputs for datasets
|
├── inference/                  # Scripts for running inference
│   ├── __init__.py
│   └── generate_certificate.py # Generates certificate using RAG + Fine-tuned LLM
|
├── evaluation/                 # Scripts & data for pipeline evaluation
│   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── benchmark_systems.json    # Sample benchmark systems (incl. sampling bounds)
│   ├── evaluate_pipeline.py    # Main script to run evaluation
│   ├── verify_certificate.py     # Script for symbolic & numerical checks (basic)
│   └── evaluation_results.csv    # (Output) Example evaluation results
|
├── recent_papers_all_sources_v2/ # Default output directory for fetched papers
|
├── results_barrier_certs/        # Default output directory for fine-tuning results
│   └── final_adapter/            # Saved LoRA adapter weights
|
├── install.sh                  # Original install script (review needed)
├── requirements.txt            # Python package dependencies
└── README.md                   # This file
```

---

## Setup

### Prerequisites

*   **Python:** Version 3.8 - 3.12 recommended. (Versions >= 3.13 may have compatibility issues with dependencies like `spacy`).
*   **Git:** For cloning the repository.
*   **Tesseract OCR Engine:** Required by `pytesseract` for OCR in Phase 2.
    *   *Debian/Ubuntu:* `sudo apt update && sudo apt install tesseract-ocr`
    *   *macOS:* `brew install tesseract`
    *   *Windows:* Download installer from [Tesseract at UB Mannheim](https://github.com/UB-Mannheim/tesseract/wiki) or build from source.
*   **CUDA Toolkit:** Required for GPU acceleration (fine-tuning, inference). Ensure compatibility with `torch` and `bitsandbytes` versions in `requirements.txt`. Check NVIDIA's documentation for installation.

### Installation

1.  **Clone:**
    ```bash
    # Replace with your repository URL
    git clone https://your-repository-url/FMLLMSolver.git
    cd FMLLMSolver/paper_population
    ```

2.  **Create Environment (Recommended):**
    ```bash
    # Use a recommended Python version (e.g., 3.12)
    conda create -n fmllm python=3.12 # Or python -m venv venv
    conda activate fmllm             # Or source venv/bin/activate
    ```

3.  **Install Dependencies:**
    ```bash
    pip install -r requirements.txt
    ```

4.  **Download SpaCy Model:**
    ```bash
    python -m spacy download en_core_web_sm
    ```

---

## Workflow / Usage

Execute the steps in the following order. Ensure you are in the `FMLLMSolver/paper_population` directory and your environment is activated.

### 1. Data Fetching

*   **(Optional)** Modify `data_fetching/user_ids.csv` if needed.
*   Run the script:
    ```bash
    python data_fetching/paper_fetcher.py
    ```
*   Downloads PDFs to `recent_papers_all_sources_v2/` (by default).

### 2. Build Knowledge Base

*   Processes downloaded PDFs, performs OCR, chunks, embeds, and indexes the text.
    ```bash
    python knowledge_base/knowledge_base_builder.py
    ```
*   Creates the index (`.faiss`) and metadata (`.json`) in `knowledge_base/knowledge_base_enhanced/`.

### 3. Test Knowledge Base (Optional)

*   Perform a quick check on the knowledge base retrieval.
    ```bash
    python knowledge_base/test_knowledge_base.py "What is a barrier certificate?" -k 3
    ```

### 4. Create/Prepare Fine-tuning Data

This is the most critical step for model performance. Choose one or more methods:

*   **Option A: Manual Creation** (Requires domain expertise, Recommended for high quality)
    ```bash
    python fine_tuning/create_finetuning_data.py --output_file fine_tuning/manual_data.jsonl
    ```
    Follow prompts to enter verified (System, Certificate) pairs.
*   **Option B: Synthetic Generation** (Good for basic examples, limited scope)
    ```bash
    python fine_tuning/generate_synthetic_data.py --output_file fine_tuning/synthetic_data.jsonl
    ```
*   **Option C: LLM-Assisted Extraction** (Requires powerful external LLM + **Mandatory Manual Review**)
    1.  `python fine_tuning/extract_from_papers.py --output_instructions_file prompts_to_run.txt`
    2.  Manually run prompts from `prompts_to_run.txt` with an external LLM (e.g., GPT-4, Claude 3).
    3.  **CRITICALLY REVIEW** LLM outputs for correctness against source papers.
    4.  Save **verified** JSON objects (one per line) to `fine_tuning/extracted_data_verified.jsonl`.
*   **Combine Datasets:** Merge desired sources into a final training file. The `combine_datasets.py` script attempts to read `metadata.source` or infer source from filenames.
    ```bash
    # Example: Combine manual, synthetic, and verified extracted data
    python fine_tuning/combine_datasets.py \\\
        fine_tuning/manual_data.jsonl \\\
        fine_tuning/synthetic_data.jsonl \\\
        fine_tuning/extracted_data_verified.jsonl \\\
        --output_file fine_tuning/finetuning_data_combined.jsonl

    # Example: Create dataset with only synthetic data
    # python fine_tuning/combine_datasets.py fine_tuning/synthetic_data.jsonl --output_file fine_tuning/finetuning_data_synthetic_only.jsonl
    ```

### 5. Run an Initial Training Test (Optional)

This section guides you through performing a minimal run of the fine-tuning pipeline using only synthetic data to ensure the scripts execute correctly. **Note:** This is likely insufficient for producing an effective model.

*   **Prerequisites:** Ensure steps 1 and 2 (Fetching, Building KB) are done. Ensure [Setup](#setup) is complete.
*   **Generate Synthetic Data:**
    ```bash
    python fine_tuning/generate_synthetic_data.py --output_file fine_tuning/synthetic_data.jsonl
    ```
*   **Prepare Synthetic-Only Dataset for Trainer:**
    ```bash
    python fine_tuning/combine_datasets.py \\\
        fine_tuning/synthetic_data.jsonl \\\
        --output_file fine_tuning/finetuning_data_initial_test.jsonl \\\
    ```
*   **Run Fine-tuning (Requires GPU):**
    ```bash
    python fine_tuning/finetune_llm.py \\\
        --data_path fine_tuning/finetuning_data_initial_test.jsonl \\\
        --output_dir ./results_initial_test \\\
        --num_train_epochs 1 # Keep epochs low for initial test
    ```
*   Monitor output. If successful, adapter weights appear in `./results_initial_test/final_adapter`.

### 6. Fine-tune the LLM (Full)

*   ⚠️ **Requires a CUDA-enabled GPU with sufficient VRAM** (e.g., >16GB for 7B/8B models with QLoRA).
*   Execute the fine-tuning script, pointing to your **high-quality combined dataset** created in step 4.
    ```bash
    python fine_tuning/finetune_llm.py \\\
        --data_path fine_tuning/finetuning_data_combined.jsonl \\\
        --output_dir ./results_full_run1 \\\
        --num_train_epochs 3 # Adjust as needed
    ```
*   Saves the LoRA adapter weights to the specified output directory (e.g., `./results_full_run1/final_adapter`).

### 7. Generate Certificate (Inference)

*   Uses the RAG pipeline with the fine-tuned adapter to propose a certificate.
    ```bash
    python inference/generate_certificate.py \\\
      "System Dynamics: dx/dt = -x**3 - y, dy/dt = x - y**3. Initial Set: x**2+y**2 <= 0.1. Unsafe Set: x >= 1.5" \\\
      --adapter ./results_full_run1/final_adapter # Use adapter from full run
    ```
*   Replace the system description text. Ensure the `--adapter` path is correct.

### 8. Evaluate the Pipeline

*   **Populate Benchmark:** Add diverse systems to `evaluation/benchmark_systems.json`. **Ensure `sampling_bounds` are defined** for each system.
*   Run the full evaluation pipeline using your trained adapter:
    ```bash
    python evaluation/evaluate_pipeline.py \\\
      --adapter ./results_full_run1/final_adapter \\\
      --benchmark evaluation/benchmark_systems.json \\\
      --results evaluation/evaluation_full_run1.csv
    ```
*   This script runs generation, attempts parsing, performs symbolic **and numerical** verification, and saves results.

---

## Configuration

Default paths, model names, and hyperparameters are set as constants near the top of each relevant Python script. Many of these can be overridden using command-line arguments.

Run scripts with `-h` or `--help` to see available arguments, for example:

```bash
python fine_tuning/finetune_llm.py --help
python evaluation/evaluate_pipeline.py --help
```

---

## Verification Limitations

⚠️ **The current verification (`evaluation/verify_certificate.py`) provides basic symbolic checks and more extensive numerical sampling checks, but it is NOT sufficient for formal safety guarantees.**

*   **Symbolic Checks:** Uses `sympy` to calculate the Lie derivative (\(\dot{B}\)). Checks if \(\dot{B}\) is identically zero, but other symbolic checks for \(\dot{B} \le 0\) are heuristic and limited.
*   **Numerical Checks:** Uses `numpy` and `scipy` (via `sympy.lambdify`) to sample points within specified `sampling_bounds`.
    *   Checks if \(\dot{B}(x) \le \epsilon\) for samples within the safe set.
    *   Checks boundary conditions (e.g., \(B(x) \le \epsilon\) in initial set, \(B(x) \ge -\epsilon\) outside unsafe set) on samples.
    *   **Provides empirical evidence but not formal proof.** A counterexample might be missed.
    *   Set membership checks currently use `eval` on condition strings, which requires trusted input in the benchmark file.
*   **Boundary Conditions:** Formal verification of boundary conditions remains challenging, especially symbolically.

For reliable verification, especially for publication or deployment, integration with more advanced methods like **Sum-of-Squares (SOS) programming** (for polynomial systems) or **robust optimization-based falsification** is necessary.

---

## Author / Context

This project was developed by **Patrick Cooper** as part of graduate work at the **University of Colorado Boulder (CU Boulder)**.

---

## Future Work / Enhancements

*   **PDF Parsing:** Integrate GROBID (structure) or MathPix API (equations) into `knowledge_base_builder.py`.
*   **Fine-tuning Data:** Explore semi-automated methods for extracting (System, Certificate) pairs.
*   **Robust Verification:** Implement optimization-based falsification or interface with SOS solvers in `verify_certificate.py`. Replace `eval`-based set checks with safer parsing.
*   **LLM Output Parsing:** Improve the robustness of `extract_certificate_from_llm_output`.
*   **Experimentation:** Test different base LLMs, embedding models, vector databases, and fine-tuning strategies.
*   **UI:** Develop a simple graphical or web interface.
